If you look at the history in the United
States of government ownership of
private sector companies, it has almost
always only been in the context of
bailouts. You know, so in the 1930s, a
bunch of banks are failing. Some of the
New Deal programs, in particular
something called the Reconstruction
Finance Corporation, take stakes in at
least 40% or so of America's banks again
in the 1930s. But that's that's really
fundamentally a bailout program for the
banks cuz the banks are uh going uh
under. You know, similarly, uh you know,
famous examples in more recent history,
in 1979-1980,
Chrysler's going bankrupt. As part of a
bailout of uh Chrysler, the government
takes warrants uh in Chrysler. Then
during 2008 in the financial crisis, as
part of the bailouts of AIG and some of
the other uh financial uh companies, as
well as some of the bailouts of
automakers back then, government takes
equity. But historically, we've only
done it during um uh kind of bailouts.
And and the government, when it has
taken these equity stakes as part of
bailouts, has always made clear our goal
is to own this for as short a time as
possible. Cuz I think I remember from
the 2008 um auto bailouts, those were
warrants, right? The goal was always to
like eventually get out of that
position.
Exactly. It was very clear, you know,
you go back, you read uh both the
Treasury Department guidance at the
time, you read the press at the time,
you read the statute, and it was kind of
we're going to take this as a security
interest for the bailout, you know, for
as short a time as possible. And and the
Treasury Department exited most of those
positions within uh a couple of years,
uh certainly as as soon as commercially
uh feasible. And I think what the Trump
administration is doing now is really
quite different, where they seem to be
seeing themselves, seeing the US
government, as a long-term investor in a
set of sectors and a set of companies
where they think having that government
capital as a long-term investor will
help a strengthen the company in the
sector and uh b potentially give some
time um some upside uh to the US
government.
[Music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And I'm Tracy Alloway.
Tracy, isn't it you who said for a long
time that whenever the government does
some of these deals, like with chips or
maybe the early backing of Tesla, etc.,
aren't you always like why didn't the
government get equity stakes in these
companies? Why are we just getting back
sort of loans that are more or less the
same amount of money we put in? Yeah, I
think I have said that.
>> Yeah. I mean, it it seems like this
weird sort of half ground where you are
investing in a company without asking
anything in return.
>> Yeah. I mean, they to be fair, they do
have milestones and provisions and so
forth. But yes, it does feel like some
of these uh funding structures have
been, I would say, at least incomplete
uh to uh say the least, and the
effectiveness has been inconsistent.
All that being said, uh the Trump
administration, apparently a big fan of
yours,
listening to you over the years on the
podcast, with some recent deals is sort
of getting into the
uh the equity business in some way.
Yeah, so I've seen people describing
this as uh more activist uh industrial
policy or state interventionist
industrial policy. One thing I will say,
for a president who seems to uh like
call calling other people communist
quite a lot, he sure does enjoy owning
the means of production. Yeah, there's
certainly some scrambling, right? Of the
um sort of
you know, there's an ideological
scrambling, and clearly this sort of
comfort with What were you going to say?
>> Well, this is the other thing. The
ideological scrambling has been
interesting to watch cuz you had people
like um Bernie Sanders who were saying,
well, the the Intel deal is a great
return for the American people. And then
you had um I can't remember the name,
but you had a Republican going like, oh,
this is the end of capitalism. So it's
kind of funny to watch. It's super
interesting, uh super confusing time.
I'm not personally as bothered by the
lack of quote taxpayer return on this
stuff, mostly because I view the goal or
failure is is there going to be a public
benefit? Are we going to have security
because we can produce chips? Are we
going to have security because we
financed domestically uh mining of raw
raw uh or rare rare earth minerals and
so forth. But um these are like the big
questions, and I think um we should
learn more about the sort of new
approach and what's a continuation of
what we saw under Biden, what's
different, etc., whether any of this
will work. Of course, by the way, you
know, we're talking about an Intel. So
Intel specifically, the government has
taken some sort of warrant or something.
I'm not totally sure.
>> They took shares, I think, almost a 10%
stake.
>> Yeah. And then so uh and something
similar in MP, the great hope for
whether the US could also mine rare
earth minerals such as China. So pretty
big deals, and I think uh we should talk
about them more. Can I just say if you
go to Intel right now on the terminal
and you uh type in HS, which is the
holders,
uh you could see the US government now
listed as a a top shareholder. And if
you click into it, it says US Department
of Commerce. I don't know why. I just
find that so like
>> I I I had not looked at that.
>> Yeah, it's kind of funny. And I don't
know. I just have this vision of like
Howard Lutnick like checking on his
portfolio of Intel.
>> to get we're going to get the you know,
we're going to get an ETF actually on
ironically, um our old friend uh Luke
Kawa at Sherwood, he had a really good
uh post yesterday pointing out the fact
that, and this is very important, the
shares of Intel and MP and one other one
have done very well. So a lot of people
are sort of making this trade of why
would you not be in the same trade as
the US government if the government is
long Intel in some respects and MP, and
given they're going to want to support
their investment and see a return, why
would you as a shareholder not want to
sort of get ahead of that train or be on
the same side?
>> Oh, wow. I'm looking at the Intel chart
right now. It's gone up a lot.
>> It's gone up a lot. So there's a there's
this is a meaty subject that we have to
talk about further. So I'm very excited
to say we have the perfect guest,
someone who's been talking about this,
someone who even recently contributed uh
something to the Odd Lots newsletter
specifically about the MP deal. We are
going to be speaking with Peter Harrell.
He's a non-resident fellow at the
Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace. He was also serving in the Biden
White House National Security Council
Economic Council. And uh he's going to
talk us through these deals. So Peter,
thank you so much for coming on Odd
Lots. Yeah, it's great to be on. Thanks
for having me. Why don't you just sort
of give us a very brief background or
your background or your work and why
you're particularly interested in these
deals arrangements?
Yeah, so um so I served at the Biden
White House for the first two years or
so of the administration doing uh
industrial policy. And you know, it's
interesting. I'd actually gotten into
the industrial policy file for the White
House because back during uh the
campaign in 2020, I was advising the
Biden campaign, and Brian Deese, who was
with the campaign then later became the
National Economic Council Director, came
to me and was like, you know, it's COVID
times, we have all these supply chain
issues, you know, there are podcasts
that talk about the supply chain issues.
Uh maybe we should do something uh about
this. And so I actually on the campaign
had put together what was a uh campaign
pledge that uh then candidate Biden
rolled out in mid uh 2020 um on, you
know, how you could strengthen American
supply chains. And you know, the the the
uh the downside of doing that is then
you get to you win the elect president
wins the election uh and Brian Deese
calls you back up and says, "Hey, you
remember that thing you did last summer?
How would you like to come in and uh
start getting industrial policy along
with a whole huge team of other people
uh going in this country again."
So just to sort of set the scene um
before we talk about why these deals are
ever being mentioned in that. What was
the quid pro quo in these sorts of
previous government deals?
Yeah, and Tracy, I appreciated the
comment you made in the opening uh in
your opening about um you know, how you
talked a lot you you've talked
previously that maybe there should be
some government upside in uh in when the
government is invested when the
government is investing money in some
technology or some uh development of
some industrial uh capacity. That is
very, very unusual in American history.
If you look at the history in the United
States of government ownership of
private uh sector companies, it has
almost always only been in the context
of bailouts. You know, so in the 1930s,
a bunch of banks are failing. Some of
the New Deal programs, in particular
something called the Reconstruction
Finance Corporation, take stakes in at
least 40% or so of America's banks again
in the 1930s. But that's that's really
fundamentally a bailout program for the
banks cuz the banks are uh going uh
under. You know, similarly, uh you know,
famous examples in more recent history,
in 1979-1980,
Chrysler's going bankrupt. As part of a
bailout of uh Chrysler, the government
takes warrants uh in Chrysler. Then
during 2008 in the financial crisis, as
part of the bailouts of AIG and some of
the other uh financial uh companies, as
well as some of the bailouts of
automakers back then, government takes
equity. But historically, we've only
done it during um
uh kind of bailouts. And and the
government, when it has taken these
equity stakes as part of bailouts, has
always made clear our goal is to own
this for as short a time as possible.
Cuz I think I remember from the 2008 um
auto bailouts, those were warrants,
right? The goal was always to like
eventually get out of that position.
Exactly. It was very clear, you know,
you go back, you read both the Treasury
Department guidance at the time, you
read the press at the time, you read the
statute, and it was kind of we're going
to take this as a security interest for
the bailout, you know, for as short a
time as possible. And you know, and the
Treasury Department exited most of those
positions within a couple of years,
certainly as as soon as commercially
feasible. And I think what the Trump
administration is doing now is really
quite different, where they seem to be
seeing themselves, seeing the US
government as a long-term investor in a
set of sectors and a set of companies
where they think having that government
capital as a long-term investor will
help A, strengthen the company in the
sector, and B, potentially give some
time some upside to the US government.
So, what are you with Intel and MP, what
do you give the sort of broad, as you
understand them, the broad stroke
structure of these arrangements? What is
the nature of these investments? What
are the obligations of the companies and
so forth? Give us the sort of outline of
them.
You know, and Joe, to pick up on a point
you had made during your introduction,
it's it's not that the idea of
government support for chip
manufacturing in the US or for rare
earths in the US is new. I mean, there
was a chips program under the Biden
administration. There have going back
for more than a decade now been programs
to try to get US rare earths processing.
Historically, those things have been
done through grants and loans, not
equity, you know, so there were is a
grant to Intel to pay basically 15%.
This is prior to the Trump
administration. There's a grant to Intel
to pay basically 15% 15% of the cost
that Intel was going to incur to build
four sets of fabs here in the United
States. There were grants and prior to
the Trump administration to MP Materials
to help subsidize MP Materials building
a rare earths mine and processing
facility. So, we've historically done
this through grants and and and loans,
and as you say,
you know, the idea was the the public
return was well, we have chip
manufacturing in the US or we have rare
earths processing in in the US. What the
Trump administration has done is
converted what were grant and loan
programs into programs where as part of
the grant or loan, the government is
taking an equity stake. In the Intel
case, it is taking a 9.9%
equity stake in exchange for
transferring
the unallocated, the unspent part of
that previous Intel grant to Intel. So,
they instead of doling it out over years
as Intel built the fab, they have now
transferred just under $6 billion in
cash to Intel and equity in return. And
they've also actually relieved Intel of
some of its legal obligations to build
the fab. So, they're sort of converting
this grant into an equity purchase.
Similar with MP, the MP deal is
extremely complicated. You know, I wrote
a 4,000-word piece for you along with my
colleague Arnab Datta on this.
But basically, DOD has contracted with
MP Materials, the Department of Defense,
or maybe we call it the Department of
War now, has contracted with MP
Materials to scale up a mine in
California to mine for rare earths, and
then to scale up in both California and
Texas um
a processing facility to turn those rare
earths into magnets, which are used in
all kinds of industrial applications.
And as part of this very large contract
to pay MP Materials to scale up the
mining and processing operations, the
government MP has given the government a
15% stake in in MP. Defense Department's
now the largest shareholder there.
Just on the Intel deal, you mentioned
that um
the grants and loans that were
previously given under the Chips Act,
those came with milestones that Intel
had to meet, right? In terms of building
fabs and actually expanding
manufacturing of semiconductors in the
US. But under this new deal, those are
now delinked from the equity stake, I
guess. Do we have any sense of what the
Trump administration's actual goals are
in this deal? Cuz I could understand,
you know, if they if they give a company
money and they say you have to do the
following things to expand production,
that would make sense. But if they say
have some money and make sure you give
us a shareholder return, that seems a
little bit different.
It is a different deal. As you say,
Tracy, the the original deal between the
Commerce Department and Intel was
planning to dole out about $8 billion
over a number of years with the payments
to Intel at that time, grant payments
made to Intel
as Intel met certain agreed milestones
for how they were building out four sets
of fabs, Ohio, Arizona, New Mexico, and
and Oregon. According to the SEC filings
that Intel has made,
Intel is now, as we discussed, relieved
of those milestone obligations. Now, I
think the Trump administration's view is
that well, by injecting capital into
Intel, by taking an equity stake in
Intel, we, the US government, are
sending a very strong signal of support
to Intel. Both gives them some capital
up front, but it also gives them this
very strong signal of support that will
help Intel go around and, you know, get
customers, get other investors to come
in. They are now They also now have
Nvidia coming in as an investor, so
there's a little bit of a record already
to suggest that might be happening. But
it's kind of rather than here are things
we want you to do, we will pay you for
milestones, it is more of an approach of
we are going to bet on you as a company
and hope that our bet on you helps you
succeed over time. As you said, they're
actually up The government's stake is
up, I think, 60%. So, it's, you know,
cash-wise turned out okay for them so
far. Yeah, I was going to say, it's been
a good trade, and maybe some of the
reason that the stock has rallied, maybe
it's just the sort of pure logic as you
expressed, or it could just be sort of
like it could be sort of meme stock
traders, people are excited about or
here is a thing that's going on, we just
want to be in on the trade. From your
perspective, though, do you see
something about the structure of this
deal such that
there is reason to be, frankly, that
there's reason to be more hopeful about
Intel's future in this arrangement just
on a fundamentals basis?
So, I think of this is a very
high-risk
bet in the following ways. If you go and
talk to pretty much anyone in the
semiconductor industry, and if you've
talked to them, and you guys have talked
to them over the last couple of years,
you hear a lot of concern about Intel's
health. You know, Intel made a couple of
huge strategic missteps. They decided in
2007 that they did not want to produce
chips for the iPhone, you know, huge
strategic misstep. They decided in the
mid-2000s and 10, in mid-2010s, that
they were not going to bet on something
called EUV lithography, which is
advanced lithography that TSMC uses to
make what are today hands down the
world's most advanced chips. And over
the last couple of years, Intel has been
playing a huge catch-up game, and
there've been very deep doubts across
the industry about whether Intel can
actually do this catch-up game. I think
the government's theory here is well, if
we show support for Intel, um we can
encourage, you know, other investors to
come in, we can encourage the potential
customers of Intel chips to come in, you
know, Apple and Nvidia. We can encourage
customers to come in, and we can really
bet on this company and help get them
not just the capital, but also the
customers and other things they need to
turn it around. That's the bet.
Something you pointed out in your piece
for us on the MP, and other people have
talked about this as well, but that deal
provides like an order book or guarantee
the government is going to buy more. And
we've talked about this with other
guests that it's not just enough in some
of these cases to subsidize supply or
make it easier to build, but it also
helps to have that guaranteed buyer for
several years out, etc. And so that when
something is produced, there is
knowledge of an end customer. Is there
any such provision or relation in the
Intel deal in terms of if they build X
that there will be a buyer for X?
No. So, so as in the Intel deal, there's
no kind of guaranteed
end customer government support for for
the end customer. With one exception, I
mean, going back to the Biden
administration days, there's there's
been a little piece of this deal that is
actually not with the Commerce
Department, it's with the Defense
Department to build
sort of highly secure chips for the
Pentagon. Like there, there is obviously
a guaranteed customer, but that's a
small piece of this deal.
Could you argue that Intel's main
problem isn't necessarily cash in the
first place? I think it has something
like 10 billion in cash on its balance
sheet, which is probably a drop in the
ocean if you're building fabs. But on
the other hand, you know, there is a lot
of capital crowding into the
semiconductor space, and it seems, given
some of the missteps that the company
has made Previously, maybe the issue is
more management than actual balance
sheet health.
Yeah, so when I look at Intel, I think
it's biggest problems aren't really
access to capital, as you said. I mean,
even prior to the government investment,
it was a hundred billion dollar market
cap company. It could raise money in the
debt markets. The biggest problems were
uh can it do the engineering to build
advanced chips? Like that's problem
number one.
>> actually do the thing it says it's going
to do? Exactly. And related to that, are
there going to be customers to buy
Intel's chips? And those two things are
obviously uh totally linked because if
it can't do the engineering, there won't
be customers. Uh and if it can do the
engineering, there probably uh will be
um
will be customers. I mean, I think the
big risk with the Intel deal is that we
definitely have an instance here of the
government picking a winner, right? They
are placing a huge bet on Intel and not
on TSMC and not on, you know, startup
semiconductor companies that might
actually be more innovative uh in this
uh space. And and that is something, you
know, the government has not
historically done. You know,
historically, we've kind of said we want
to let, you know, companies go out and
compete in the marketplace and we're not
going to put a very heavy thumb on the
scale in favor of one uh particular kind
of, you know, champion company here. And
and we are very much seeing the
government um even though it's not a
formal contract here, clearly the
impetus now is for the government to be
putting a thumb on the scale here for
Intel and hope that helps them get
customers and engineers and the like.
What legal authority does the Trump
administration actually have to do this?
So, we spoke about the CHIPS Act. Pretty
sure the CHIPS Act doesn't say anything
about taking equity stakes in return for
grants and loans.
Could it be something like the Defense
Production Act or some other act that I
am unaware of that might be in the
making?
Well, you know, we talked about how
there isn't a lot of history uh for the
US government taking equity stakes. And
there's not really any law out there
that authorizes the government to take
uh equity stakes in private companies
with a, you know, handful of exceptions.
And the CHIPS Act is not one of them. I
think the Trump administration's legal
theory here basically boils down to two
things. You know, first is, well, the
CHIPS Act may not say we can take an
equity stake, but it doesn't forbid us
from taking an equity stake, so why not?
And then thing two on their legal theory
is who's going to sue us anyway? I mean,
Intel's not going to sue us, right? They
just agreed uh to this deal. And it's
it's not clear that anyone else really
has legal uh standing to go into court
to sue over this. So, you know, like
like um much of the Trump
administration, I think we are we are
seeing a lot of um novel interpretive
approaches to the law. But it really
does boil down to, I think, at at its
core, there's no They have a very
flexible authority, legally speaking.
They have a very flexible grant
authority. It was clearly intended as a
grant authority, not an equity
authority. But if you read the the
details of the grant authority, it
doesn't say you cannot take equity as a
part of this. It just says you can give
grants. And they've interpreted that as
allowing them to take equity as part of
the grant.
I want to go back to uh the the question
about whether the engineering capacity
actually exists for Intel to become a
top flight product producer of
semiconductors. Again, you know, you
mentioned the quote strategic missteps,
whether it was choosing not to build the
chips for the iPhone or to get into
advanced UV lithography. Uh but again,
they could have chosen to do those
things and not execute on them. Like
they could have made different strategic
choices and just not uh done them as
well as TSMC. And this also gets back to
the MP deal because, okay, like there is
this big mine out in California that's
very rich very rich in rare earths and
so forth. But a lot of the question is
not whether you could dig it out of the
ground, but whether you can refine these
metals at a cost competitive price,
especially compared to the Chinese who
have invested a ton of this and are
clearly far and away the leader in the
most advanced infrastructure, etc. Um
there like I'm curious with that deal
like with MP,
do you perceive them as having the same
questions hanging over them about
whether, okay, they get this money and
they have this mine, can they
bring the create these magnets at a
price or at a market competitive price?
Well, I think that the uh MP materials
deal sort of insures that they are not
going to create uh these magnets at a
market competitive price. But at some
level, that doesn't matter because the
government has agreed uh both to
purchase all of the off-take of the
magnets. So, as part of the deal, the
government is buying a hundred percent
of the magnets. Now, it could resell
some of these magnets to private
parties, but it's a guaranteed purchaser
of all of them. And on top of being the
guaranteed purchaser uh of the magnets,
it has also guaranteed a um guaranteed
profit margin for uh MP. So, I actually
kind of get why private investors are uh
crowding into MP cuz it's sort of a
no-lose business proposition uh at this
point. But I do think the reality, at
your point, Joe, is that that, you know,
China is the low-cost producer of rare
earth magnets. It it just is. It has the
scale and the best multiple companies
that do it. And the best, it has the
engineering, it has no, you know, low
environmental regula- It is the low-cost
producer. If we as the United States do
not want to be dependent on China for
rare earth magnets, we are going to
have, at least in the, you know, near
and mid-term, to pay more for those
magnets. And so that subsidy is either
going to have to be a direct subsidy
from the US government, like the MP
materials deal, or it's going to have to
be an indirect subsidy, like tariffs or
something else that forces uh US
manufacturers to, you know, pay US
producers because the foreign they're
protected from uh from foreign
competition. And that's just the reality
of this this market. And then you get
into this whole debate of, you know, are
the national security needs, are the
economic security needs so great that it
is worth paying uh you know, what will
be a subsidy to have that production
here in the US. Well, talk to us about
the corporate governance angle in all of
this. So, with Intel, the US government
is getting a 9.9% stake. Uh they also, I
think, have a golden share um like they
do in the Nippon deal. Again, that's
something that we tend to associate with
uh China's state interventionist style.
And we should talk about that a little
bit later. But, you know, is is Howard
Lutnick going to be showing up to Intel
AGMs and participating in in the votes?
So, this this is another thing that
worries me, Tracy, about the government
taking equity in companies without kind
of a clear statutory basis for it.
Because there isn't really any federal
set of regulations or laws about how the
government should manage its investments
and what its role in corporate
governance should be. So, we're we're
sort of seeing ad hoc uh approaches as
the government does these deals. In the
Intel case, uh if you read uh the SEC
filings, the government has basically
agreed to vote the shares the way the
board recommends the shares be voted. Um
you know, except in a couple of of sort
of uh major types of transactions, like
an overall change of control, you know,
change in ownership of control uh
transaction. So, that's a great deal for
the board because actually now the board
of Intel knows it has 10% or 9.9% of the
shares to do whatever it wants, right?
Great deal for the uh the
um uh the board. But I think but that's
unique to the um to the the Intel deal.
Um and it will be interesting to see as
these play out, do we see more and more
kind of direct um
government, you know, involvement in the
management uh of the of the companies.
It's interesting.
One of the things that I think the
corporate income tax rate in the United
States is 21%. Now, if I if I own
21% of a private company, right? I'm in
theory entitled to 21% of their income.
It's kind of one way to think about it.
In a sense, the US government already
owns about a fifth of every private
company in America in in America, right?
Because you have your profits and then
79% goes to the normal shareholders,
then 21% uh goes to the government.
There is a sense in which the government
already owns a fifth of every company
through taxation. The difference is,
however, exactly what you just
identified, which is this is a very
passive equity stake that the government
sort of has in every uh company. So,
what's really changing is this
potential, not that the government is
going to collect income or
uh from the profits, but this potential
for new ways for sort of activist
involvement in the private sector beyond
the sort of traditional regulatory or
legal environment that exists.
Yeah, and and it is both that this is
going to give potentially the government
a way of meddling much more specifically
and with much more detail in individual
companies. And it also is much more of
the government potentially, you know,
picking winners within an industry. I
mean, let's take MP. You know, MP is one
of uh it's not the only company in the
US that is uh trying to get rare earths
mining and manufacturing uh going again.
There are a number of other companies
that are doing this
uh with mining operations elsewhere in
the US. And there are also some
companies that are in the technology
space that are saying, you know, what?
We might be able to um create uh magnets
that do what rare earth magnets do, but
without using any rare earths. We have,
you know, we're developing new uh
materials. And And And the government
here, rather than sort of saying, "You
know what? We have a program where we're
giving a tax incentive to anybody
who qualifies to kind of let all of
these ideas flourish." The government is
saying, "You know what? We're
guaranteeing
that MP is going to make the money here
without actually knowing is MP like the
the most cost-efficient, the best
technological bet?" It It is very much a
picking winners and losers rather than
seeing what flourishes in the market
approach. Do we have any sense of how
foreign governments and foreign
businesses are reacting to this? So, I'm
aware that Intel put out a statement
that basically warned that having the US
government as a major shareholder could
be problematic for the company. It could
lead to maybe additional regulations or
obligations or restrictions abroad. Um
Have you picked up any, I guess,
scuttlebutt on how
Scuttlebutt? Is that a word?
>> No, it's great. It's a great word. It's
a classic. All right. Any scuttlebutt on
how foreign entities are reacting?
So, I do think foreign governments are
worried about what it means the US
government is investing in specific
companies. And they're worried about it
in
two ways. One of which is just like the
classic
governments worry about what other
government subsidies are going to do.
You know, if there's more subsidies for
Intel, how is that going to affect
European
manufacturing? Also, Intel in particular
had been planning to build fabs in
Europe actually prior to the US
government buy out buy in had canceled
those fabs in Europe. But there's worry
like would Intel still be a reliable
partner
if it is investing overseas or is it
just going to invest in the US now that
it's US government owned? And then the
other one is I do think that for
companies, particularly technology
companies, you know, we are in this era
of geopolitics where we worry a lot
about Chinese companies or Chinese
companies worry about the security issue
issues around American companies. I
think European companies are
increasingly getting worried about you
know, is American tech safe to be used?
And the closer the US government gets to
a company, I think the more you're going
to see foreign governments wonder about
those security risks. I mean, I just
look at what Microsoft had to do a
couple of months ago where they actually
said in response to European privacy
concerns
about Microsoft products in Europe that,
you know, that Microsoft would be
prepared to sue the US government if the
US government started putting you know,
unfair privacy requests on Microsoft
about European customers. I don't think
anyone would believe that Intel's going
to sue the US government at this point
to
protect the privacy rights of its
customers. So, you mentioned the issue
of picking winners, which of course is
an issue that precedes any equity stake.
Every industrial policy in the world
always has to think about this risk or
possibility. And traditionally, the way
it sometimes quote works in the context
of sort of developing economies is they
might have that sort of export test. And
we've talked about that a bunch on the
show. Are customers in foreign markets
buying your thing? And if so, that's a
sign that you're building something
competitive and we're going to keep
backing you. And if not, this is a sign
that you're not working out. And so,
there's this mechanism. Um if we're
concerned about the idea that the
government is picking winners with MP or
picking winners with Intel,
let's say again with MP, could should
the direction be that not that we get
rid of the equity component, but that we
just sort of build out the program so
that any entity at any stage could
theoretically make the US government a
partner and that partnership is
contingent on its success in some, you
know, some market measure.
Well, I guess I look at that as as Joe,
you know, you talked about taxes
earlier. Isn't that what a tax credit's
for? I mean, if you look at the CHIPS
Act,
the original CHIPS Act, we all focused
on the grant part of the CHIPS Act. And
this is the grant part of the CHIPS Act
that we're talking about now. But But
actually, I think the more important
part of the CHIPS Act is there was a 25%
investment tax credit that lets anybody
building a fab in the US claim take 25%
of the cost of that fab as a fully
refundable tax credit. So, I mean, it's
just a very great deal. I I I I guess I
actually as a general bias would prefer
relatively more neutral approaches
that let companies thrive and succeed in
the marketplace. And where you do have
grant programs, and there will always be
a place for grant programs, I think you
want to do it in a fairly broad-based
way and seed multiple different ideas. I
mean, I've been talking just recently
with Jigar Shah, previous guest on your
podcast, about his time at at LPO. And
he, you know, he had this approach. He's
like, "I wanted to say yes to
everybody." You know, anybody who could
fit the criteria of getting a loan, I
wanted to say yes to because we want to
place a bunch of different bets on a
bunch of different technologies on a
bunch of different investments. And you
know, I think there's a lot to be said
for that, which is also historically how
we have come. Now, maybe there are rare
cases if there's a market failure or
there's some sort of market where
there's going to be a natural monopoly.
Maybe in those cases it does make sense.
You know, where there again, where
there's a natural monopoly or some kind
of market failure
and you're only going to have one or two
potentially successful companies. Maybe
you do want the government to take a
stake there because if it's kind of
guaranteeing
the market some upside for the the
for the taxpayer makes makes sense. But
I I generally think that should be a
pretty rare instance in our in our
capitalist system. So, there is an irony
here that an administration which has
been very critical of China and you
know, criticized them for manipulating
their market or cheating on global trade
rules or doing illegal subsidies and all
of that kind of stuff is now pursuing a
more interventionist approach that does
seem very reminiscent of what happens in
China. Can you compare and contrast
those two systems and maybe talk about
how policy makers are thinking about Chi
how US policy makers are thinking about
Chinese industrial policy at the moment?
I mean, there is kind of an element here
of right, we're we're we're looking a
little bit like state capitalism with
American characteristics. And I I think
we should be, you know, open and and
direct about that. There are actually
some differences. I mean, if you look at
the Chinese industrial policy
kind of approach, there are there are
both similarities and differences. I
think one big difference is actually
when it comes to equity stakes in China,
a lot of the equity is actually done at
the provincial government level. You
know, it's sort of an SOE that's owned
by a particular province relatively less
at the central government level in in
China. The central government does tend
to do a bunch of, you know, grants and
R&D programs and that kind of thing. But
they have a very heavy provincial level
element
to these. The other thing that I think
China does frankly pretty well, kind of
to where we were
where we just were talking, Tracy and
Joe, is China does tend to bet on
multiple companies. You know, if you
look at why they have a very successful
EV sector right now, it is in part
because you had lots of provinces
investing in lots of companies plus a
tremendous amount of central government
support on the demand side as well as on
the supply side of the equation. So, you
have, you know, dozens of EV companies
there out in the marketplace battling
every week to build better technology
and to sell it to to to customers. So,
they've kind of created this state
capitalism, but state capitalism that is
actually in some of these sectors quite
competitive in a way that spurs
innovation. And I think if we're going
to do more of that, we need to make sure
we are also focusing on how do we keep
this competitive to spur innovation and
don't just kind of, you know, back a
bunch of flabby 1970s European style
national champions, which, you know,
didn't turn out too well in the past.
Now's the time to start a lean and mean
fab, Joe. We've Oh, have I ever told you
my um You have, but remind me.
>> Fabless semiconductor fab apostrophe.
Although, that wouldn't be with a fab.
But I do think that'd be a good name for
a chips company, Fabless Semi.
Fab Anyway. Actually, I We've never
talked about those 1970s European
champions too much on this show. What's
the story there? I don't know anything
about them.
Well, I'm being a little bit blasé. But
you did see in the your you know, in in
Europe in the 1970s, you saw state
ownership in a number of industrial
firms. You saw it fairly heavily state
management in a way that I think a lot
of economists looking at that thought
did not make for
economic, you know, sort of the most
dynamic
over time innovative industrial programs
in Europe.
Two quick questions. So, so far, these
deals seem to be sort of ad hoc,
individualized one-offs, right? And I'm
curious if you have a sense that we're
we're building towards something that's
much more broad, a much more sustained
model of, I guess, US interventionist
involvement
in the sphere of strategically important
companies. And then secondly, what
happens to these stakes if we get a new
administration and the Democrats come in
or something like that?
Yeah, so I think
um
I think when this administration came
into when the Trump administration came
into office, I think they actually
fairly early had identified a handful of
areas where they thought equity was
appropriate. I think critical minerals
is one of those. And I think that that
is guided in part by a view that um
you know, we we aren't going to have a
domestic competitive market in critical
minerals without um either subsidies or
without a tariff wall because China just
is a low-cost producer. So, I think
there was kind of a strategic view of
we're going to do a lot of investing in
critical minerals, we're going to do a
lot of protectionism, or other kinds of
subsidies for these guys. But because we
as the government are creating this
market and it's not really a free
market, uh we as the government should
also take some equity and have some
upside. So, I think there was a
strategic view in that sector. I think
what we are seeing now is the Trump
administration is drastically broadening
out its views of what sectors the
government should get involved in. You
know, we see that with the Intel deal.
I'd also note just last week the chips
office uh chips office at the Commerce
Department put out a notice um of uh a
new grant program for semiconductor R&D.
So, not to build fabs, but to do R&D
program for semiconductors. And that
notice uh says right in it that um
bidders for these grants may be expected
to offer the government warrants or
equity uh as a piece of it. So, they are
clearly looking to build this out. We we
obviously also earlier this year when
Nippon Steel bought into US Steel saw
the non-economic golden share that
Nippon Steel got. I think we're going to
see more of that in the CFIUS context.
So, I think they had a vision early on
of a couple of discrete areas. I take it
that the president and Secretary Lutnick
and others just really like this concept
and they are now in the process of
broadening it out uh quite a bit across
a number of other sectors. And they are
probably broadening it out ahead of any
strategic vision. So, I'm a little
worried we're going to see more of this.
Uh and then they'll have to try to back
in some strategic vision um after they
have a number uh a number of these deals
in the in the latter.
>> Let's say they expanded or let's say,
okay, maybe we want to have multiple
stakes in the same industry such that
there is some competition, etc. How much
firepower does the government have? How
much capacity via the CHIPS Act does it
have to make deals like this? What would
it would it at some point need to get a
fresh allocation from Congress to uh
spend more on this? How much uh can it
do?
Yeah, well, because because their legal
theory is kind of no one says we can't
do this when we spend money, we're going
to do it. Uh you know, I think there are
ways in which they could you know,
argue, well, we could we could try to
demand equity alongside lots of
government spending and grants programs.
And we've even seen Secretary Lutnick
talk about, well, maybe the defense
contractors should give us uh give us
equity. The problem they're going to run
into is at some point, you know, the
amount of cash they're putting on the
table for a particular deal, a company
is going to decide, you know what,
that's not worth it to me, right? If
you're offering some company 50 mi you
know, a major multinational $50 to
in grant money to you know, do something
you want them to do, but you also want
3%, they're just going to say no. But
like when we you know, when we talked
about the um the LPO back in the day,
you know, there was a fixed amount of
money that had been allocated to these
um various programs and same with chips,
etc. Like how how deep is that well if
the government wants to do a lot more
chips deals? I don't even know if it
does. Maybe it just wants to pick a
winner. Does it have the sort of I guess
they would say in the private sector
context dry powder to do more of these
deals?
So, you'd have to I'd actually have to
ladder that up and think about what are
the different pots of money they could
potentially use here. They clearly have
another probably on the order of $10
billion of unallocated chips money. Uh
LPO mostly a lending facility, but they
still have lots of unallocated uh
lending power out of LPO. Now, because
that's a lending facility, not a grant
facility, kind of whether you know,
whether a company wants to give equity
as part of a loan, that's a complicated
commercial
>> They could say they could say it's a
convert and this counts as lending, but
right? They cuz again, under the theory,
no who's going to stop them, right?
I mean, that is their theory. Yeah. And
the administration is nothing if not
creative, that's for sure. Does Intel
have basically a shadow mandate now? Cuz
if I think about companies in the US,
the goal is to maximize shareholder
value and that's been pretty explicit
over time. But now you're adding in, you
know, strategic ambitions and the public
good aspect to Joe's point. Is there a
potential tension there?
I I you know, I think uh Intel has
obviously tried to protect itself from
that tension by negotiating this
provision where by and large the
government has agreed to vote um vote
its shares at the board's uh direction.
I think you can see they were trying to
minimize uh political influence. There
is another part of the the Intel deal
where where actually there's kind of a
poison pill if against Intel splitting
apart its uh fab manufacturing part and
its chip design part. There's been a
long debate uh around Intel about
whether it should split itself up or
not. And the government did um negotiate
kind of a poison pill against a a split.
So, that that is incorporated fully in
the the documents. But beyond that,
Intel I think has tried to you know,
minimize government influence in the
day-to-day operations. That's a this is
a government that wants to get involved
in day-to-day corporate operations,
right? We see the president talking
about individual executives at
individual uh companies. Uh and a
commerce secretary is very clear he
thinks companies should be doing things
in the public interest. And I think the
board is clearly probably going to feel
some pressure that not just the
government, but also the government and
its largest shareholder or one of its
largest shareholders are going to be
prodding it to do things uh that might
be in what they see as the Commerce
Department or the country's interest
even if those aren't in shareholder
interest. I think we are going to see
that tension over the next couple of
years even if Intel has tried to
insulate itself from that. All right. Uh
Peter Harrell, this was a fantastic
overview. I definitely have a much I
feel like I understand these deals much
better than before. Really appreciate
you coming on Odd Lots. You know, Tracy,
I think the point that you asked about
how might this change under say a
Democratic uh administration is to my
mind one of the most interesting
questions because again,
like I said, the government already gets
a fifth of corporate profit. The
government already can establish rules
and regulations via the regulatory
process or the legislative process about
how companies work. What's new really to
me is the specificity. This is about one
company in particular. And the ability
to sort of circumvent Congress in the
management of individual companies. And
that it's not easy to change regulation
or law with each with each
administration. But if equity stakes
allow you to change how you interact
with a specific company, then you could
really have very fast shifts from one uh
presidency to another. Yeah, I mean, I
think there's also an optics element in
here where if the administration said
we're going to raise the corporate tax
rate,
>> Yeah, sure.
>> would be unpopular. But if they say
we're going to create shareholder value
for the US uh citizens,
>> yeah.
>> yeah, exactly. It plays a little bit
differently. I do think you know, my
last question about the tension between
being a strategic asset for the US
government and the wider US population
versus being a company that's all about
profits and maximizing shareholder
value, I think that's a really
interesting one cuz again, I think back
to China.
>> Yeah. And China the the compromise there
seems to be that you have a very state
interventionist system.
>> Yeah. But on the other hand, no one
seems to expect companies to be
massively profitable, right? We spoke
with Dan Wang about this. Like maybe the
Chinese system is, you know, we build
lots of stuff, we innovate, and don't
make that much money. And I
I I just don't know like how that works
in the US. No, it's a great question. I
mean, think about it, you know, from
Intel's perspective, had it not been for
the CHIPS Act or had it not been for all
of the concern about national security
and US production, at some point the
company might have decided, you know
what, we're going to be fabulous, too,
like Nvidia is, whose market cap is, you
know, whatever 40 times as much. And it
could have been very much the case that
Intel today would be worth more as a
company, speaking of strategic missteps,
could be worth more as a company if it
had never got into the fab game at all.
That if they had just decided, you know
what, we're going to have all of our
chips be made overseas by TM TSMC and
others. So, there is this thing that
maybe the company is worth less today
than it would be had they or is worth
less today because they've had this
concern, they've had this national
security obligation that they've played
along with. Um we should we should leave
it there. I'm starting to get PTSD
flashbacks to my dad complaining about
paying his taxes in order to bail out
his uh competitor airlines.
>> Oh, that's funny.
>> used to complain about that. He He
worked at Southwest, which is one of the
few airlines that never actually went
bankrupt. All right.
>> wonder like when Peter talked about
standing to sue competitors, plausibly,
right? Couldn't a like a a Samsung US or
some or an AMD or whatever? I don't
know.
>> I think an ambitious lawyer would
probably be interested in that case. But
I think probably an ambitious CEO does
not want to get on the get on the into
the bad You know, they might they might
want to take a
>> at trough too one day and so maybe
they'd let this one slide. All right,
shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the All Thoughts
podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe
Weisenthal. You can follow me at The
Stalwart. And if you enjoyed this
conversation, then please like, leave a
comment or subscribe. Thanks for
watching.
[Music]